In the last lesson we created a brand new cluster on MongoDB Atlas and we've successfully managed
to get our Node.js app to talk to this cluster and be able to save data and communicate with our todo
listDB.
Now in this lesson we're going to deploy our Node.js app into Heroku so that we can access our website
from anywhere across the Internet and not just through localhost:3000 on our local system.
We're going to do this using our old friend Heroku and you should have already signed up to Heroku because
previously we already deployed our use letter app.
So just go ahead and log in. And it should now be looking at your personal dashboard.
There's a couple of steps that are required before we can deploy an app to Heroku and it's a good idea
to head over to the documentation to remind yourself of what those steps are.
So just click on "Node.js" and click on "Get started with "Node.js"and then click on "I'm ready to start"
and then scroll down to the part where says "I have already installed the Heroku CLI".
Now if you haven't looked at the module where we we've deployed our newsletter app to Heroku, then I
recommend heading over back there because there's a couple of set of instructions that you have to do
the first time that you deploy an app to Heroku.
But presuming that you've already done those things with me the last time we deployed to Heroku, we're
just going to plow along and power through.
The first thing to do is we need to prepare our app. And for a short list of things we need to do if
we have an existing application that we want to deploy
we're just going to click on this link and it takes us to this particular article which I'll link to
in the course resources of this lesson as well.
Now the first step is to track your codebase in a Git repository.
Let's head over to our terminal and we're going to Control + C to exit our previous nodemon instance
and just check to make sure that you're still in the location of your project folder.
And we're going to type in "git init" to initialize an empty Git repository and then we're going to say
"get add ." and this will add everything that we currently have in our repository to the staging
area and we're ready to commit our app. And I'm just going to call it "Initial commit".
The next thing that it's asking us to do is to add a Heroku Git remote. And to do this the first thing
we have to do is to log in to Heroku.
So you already should have the Heroku command line interface installed from the last time when we deployed
to Heroku
so you should be able to say "heroku login" and now it will ask you for your email and your password
to login to Heroku.
And once that's successful you'll see something in green and it'll tell you that you are logged in. Now
that you're logged in,
feel free to just type "clear" to clear your screen and we're ready to head over to the next step. And
the next step is to add a Heroku Git remote.
So here we have to say "heroku create" and that will create our brand new app on Heroku which is now called
gentle-stream.
Sounds very relaxing and we're ready to move on to the next step which is adding a Procfile. Inside
our current project container folder
we're going to write touch and then we're going to write procfile without an extension.
So the easiest way is simply just to copy this because if you have any typos it's a massive headache
down the line.
And just to paste it in here. So now we're creating a file called Procfile, with no extensions, no
tex,t no dot anything.
And we're going to hit enter. And this step is super important because later on you'll have problems
with Heroku and it will be down to something like this.
So next we're going to open up this Procfile using the application that is Atom.
If you don't add an Atom it usually defaults to TextEdit which will work just as fine
but sometimes when you write these quotation marks, it has a stylized version which leads to problems
as well.
So in our Procfile Heroku instructs us to put in something like this which tells it that it's a web
application and to start it, the entry point is at app.js.
So for us it's pretty simple.
We're just gonna copy it as is and paste it in here and then hit save.
That's step 3 done.
And then we can move on to Step 4 which is listing on the right port. Heroku is going to generate a dynamic
port
rather than use the static one which we've set as port 3000. You can either set your app to
simply only listen on their port which is process.env.PORT.
It's basically just a variable that they get to set or if you want to be able to run it locally as
well as having it run on Heroku,
then you can use something like this.
So just above our app.listen I'm going to paste those lines of code.
I'm going to change their default port to our preference which is 3000
and this basically says that let port equal the port that Heroku has set up,
if they haven't set one up when port is null or port is an empty string, then we're going to use our local
one.
So now we're going to say instead of app.listen port we're going to say app.listen, port have a callback
function that says-- console log that says "Server has started successfully".
All right so that's step 4 done.
Next is step 5 which we have already completed.
It's telling us instead of writing your database to your local file system,
so our localhost 27017 MongoDB
instead use a database
for example Amazon S3, Heroku Postgres or in our case it's MongoDB on mongodb.net.
And this is of course using our MongoDB Atlas.
Now we can skip ahead to step 6 which is completing the language-specific set up.
So we'll click on "Node.js" and the only thing that we have to do here is to add the version of
Node to our package.
json. So I'm just going to copy this and we're going to head over to our Atom where we got our package
.json and right below where it says "license" I'm going to hit enter and I'm going to paste my
engine's key in here and then I'm going to hit save.
Now this version of Node is not the version that we've been using,
it's way way old.
So to find out the version of Node that you're currently running we're just going to type into the command
line "Node --version" and hit enter.
And you can see the I'm currently working with 8.12.0.
So to figure out which Node version you're running simply in the command line just type "Node --
version" and you will get the one that you've been running locally and it's been working successfully
for you.
So just go ahead and copy that number into where it says Node.
And here we're going to put it inside the quotation marks and hit save
and we're now done with that step.
Now we're pretty much ready.
The last thing it wants us to do is to create a gitignore file that ignores our Node modules or DS_store
or the debug log.
And this is something that we learnt about when we learned about GiHub in the Git and GiHub module.
It's quite a good idea to do because at the moment we have this giant folder called Node modules and
it's got all of our dependencies in there and what Heroku will do is instead of trying to upload all
of this code it will look inside your dependencies and rebuild it using npm install on their server.
By adding a gitignore we will get to ignore all of these Node modules and get Heroku to rebuild these
on their end making it easier to work with your app.
So let's go ahead into our terminal and let's just create a .gitignore file and then we're going
to open this .gitignore file and we're going to open it inside Atom yet again.
And then we're just going to copy and paste all of these into here, hit save and now we get to ignore
the Node modules folder, the NPM debug log, and the .DS_store for example like this file that is only
there because I've created this folder on a Mac and it wants to know how I want my icons laid out.
So all of these things can go in the gitignore and we can hit save and close.
And now we are pretty much ready to deploy our application to Heroku.
So let's go ahead and again say "git add ." and "git commit"
and I'm just going to call it "Add
gitignore,
procfile and update ports". Okay.
Now let's hit enter and let's commit all of our changes. And now because we've already created our Heroku
remote we can simply skip to the next step and say "git push heroku master".
And now it's going to do a whole bunch of things behind the scenes, uploading things, compressing objects
building it, running NPM install on their side
and once it's done it will say "Build succeeded!". And it'll tell you that it's now launched and released
it to this URL: gentle-stream something something.herokuapp.com.
So now if we go ahead and click on it then you can see we have our todolist app now being deployed
from Heroku using HTTPS via the Internet and the backend is connected to our MongoDB cluster in
Atlas because that previous test item came the last time we tried to test it locally.
So let's now go ahead and test this.
Let's see if we can create a new item. Let's just call it
"Feed me".
So let's add that to our to do list and let's check in our Atlas and if we simply hit refresh to see
what new data has come through, then right at the bottom you can see the item being saved in our cluster.
So now at this point you can share this URL with anybody on Twitter, on Facebook,
share it in the Q&A section so that everybody can get to see and share it with your friends and family
and show off what you've created because anybody will be able to access it and add todo list items
or add new todo lists etc.
We've now got a complete website with a Node backend and a MongoDB database that's hosted live on
the Internet.
Well done for
everybody who's followed along this far and enjoy playing around with your live website.